---
layout: post
title:  A Picture is Worth 1000 Words
date:   2022-09-22
author: Lauren Fuller
description: How to make basic data visualizations using matplotlib in Python to better and more easily convey the hidden information of a data set. 
image: /assets/images/DataViz.webp
---

## Overview

Data Visualization is an important branch of data science. It is one of the main tools used to analyze and study relationships between different variables. This tutorial will guide you in learning how to create basic types of univariate, bivariate, and multivariate charts using matplotlib in python. 

## Why are charts useful? Why can't I just present the stats?

When presenting information, especially to those with limited backgrounds in statistics and data analytics, most individuals will have a difficult time interpreting the meaning of the data. You can talk about numbers and percentages all you want but not everyone will understand what you’re saying. 

However, once you show a chart or graph, all your ramblings make sense. It doesn't matter how well you present and explain the statistics. A nice looking chart just is sometimes better able to communicate to an audience what's happening in the data. 

## Obtain Necessary Python Packages Before You Begin
Matplotlib is the pionner data visualization package in Python. In order to create the data plots taught below, we must first import the pyplot package from the matplotlib library by running the following code: 

`from matplotlib import pyplot as plt`

## Charting Univariate Data
Some common charts used to plot univariate data are boxplots and histograms. 

### - Boxplot

Here's how we create a simple boxplot using pyplot from matplotlib:

***IMAGE

The plot will look something like this: 

***IMAGE

Commands:
* Editing the string in `plt.title` allows you to change the title of the plot.
* Editing the string in `plt.ylabel` allows you to change the label on the y-axis.
* `vert = False` - option that tells the program to create a horizontal boxplot. If you want a vertical boxplot, replace `False` with `True`.
* The `text = ` option creates text the plot. Note that this argument only takes string arguments. 
* The first two arguments or numbers in the `plt.text` argument represent the horizontal and vertical position of the text input on the plot. For example, if we wrote `plt.text(.50, .50, ...)`, then the text would appear in the exact middle of the plot. The positioning has a range from 0 to 1. 
* You can adjust the font size by changing the value after `fontsize = `. 
* `plt.show()` displays the plot


### - Histogram

Here's how we create a simple histogram using pyplot from matplotlib:

***IMAGE

The plot will look something like this: 

***IMAGE

Commands:
* The `plt.hist()` command creates the histogram from a data fram column called "bmi" and bins the data in 15 groups.
* The `text = ` and `text += ` commands create text on the plot. Note that this argument only takes string arguments.
* The first two arguments or numbers in the `plt.text` argument represent the horizontal and vertical position of the text input on the plot. For example, if we wrote `plt.text(.50, .50, ...)`, then the text would appear in the exact middle of the plot. The positioning has a range from 0 to 1. 
* You can adjust the font size of the text displayed on the plot by changing the value after `fontsize = `.  
* The `plt.axvline()` command adds a vertical line to the plot. This example plots a line on the mean of the data. You can adjust the aesthetics of the line by editing the strings after `color = `, `linestyle = `, and the integer after `linewidth = `.
* Editing the string in `pyplot.title` allows you to change the title of the plot.
* Editing the string in `plt.xlabel` allows you to change the title of the x-axis.
* Editing the string in `plt.ylabel` allows you to change the title of the y-axis.
* `plt.show()` displays the plot


### - Categorical Bar Chart
plt.bar()

Here's how we create a simple histogram using pyplot from matplotlib:

***IMAGE

The plot will look something like this: 

***IMAGE

Commands: 
* `df['smoker'].value_counts()` tells the program that we want to plot the count of the number of smokers and non-smokers from the 'smoker' column in our working data frame. 
* The first two arguments or numbers in the `plt.text` argument represent the horizontal and vertical position of the text input on the plot. For example, if we wrote `plt.text(.50, .50, ...)`, then the text would appear in the exact middle of the plot. The positioning has a range from 0 to 1. 
* You can adjust the font size of the inserted text by changing the value after `fontsize = `. 
* Editing the string in `pyplot.title` allows you to change the title of the plot.
* Editing the string in `plt.xlabel` allows you to change the title of the x-axis.
* Editing the string in `plt.ylabel` allows you to change the title of the y-axis.
* `plt.show()` displays the plot

## Charting Bivariate Data
Bivariate charts can display two types of variables in the following combinations: 
1. numerical / numerical
    * scatterplot with line of regression
2. numerical / categorical
    * bar chart
    * stacked bar chart
    * categorized boxplot
3. categorical / categorical
    * count bar chart
    * cross tab with heat map


- line of regression
    - import scipy import stats 

## 3D Scatterplots
- need to import a new


## Adding details and 
You are free to modify your graph or chart any way you want, as long as it won’t look messy, distracting, and incoherent. 